The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Numbering of the People, by George Allen


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: The Numbering of the People
       A Sermon in conjunction with the census of 1861 preached in St. Thomas' Church, Islington, on Sunday Evening, April 7


Author: George Allen



Release Date: March 20, 2021  [eBook #64876]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NUMBERING OF THE PEOPLE***


Transcribed from the 1861 B. Seeley edition by David Price.  Many thanks
to the British Library for making their edition available.





                      “THE NUMBERING OF THE PEOPLE.”


                       ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

                                 A Sermon

                  IN CONNECTION WITH THE CENSUS OF 1861,

                               PREACHED IN

                     ST.  THOMAS’ CHURCH, ISLINGTON,

                       ON SUNDAY EVENING, APRIL 7,

                                  BY THE

                            REV. GEORGE ALLEN,
           _Theological Associate_, _King’s College_, _London_,
                                INCUMBENT.

                                * * * * *

                                * * * * *

                          PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.

                                * * * * *

                                * * * * *

                       B. SEELEY, ISLINGTON GREEN;
                SEELEY, JACKSON, & HALLIDAY, FLEET STREET.

                                * * * * *

  The profits of publication will be devoted to the purchase of the new
                  Organ recently erected in the Church.




TO THE MEMBERS OF THE CONGREGATION OF
ST. THOMAS’, ISLINGTON.


MY DEAR FRIENDS,

THIS Sermon was not written with a view to publication.  I have consented
to its being printed at the earnest request of several of the most
experienced members of the congregation, to whose judgment, I felt it
would be but false modesty not to defer, when they assured me that they
considered it might, under God, be the means of doing good, and that its
publication would be a source of pleasure to you generally.

The Sermon—prepared amidst the pressure of parochial duties—is printed by
desire exactly as it was delivered from the pulpit.  I must therefore
crave your indulgence for whatever imperfections may be found in it.

With all its faults, however, I dedicate it to you as an expression of
warm affection and gratitude for the many kindnesses I have received at
your hands; and earnestly praying that the Almighty will graciously
vouchsafe His blessing to this feeble, but I trust sincere, endeavour to
promote His glory and your spiritual good,

                                 I have the happiness to subscribe myself,
                                        Your faithful Friend and Minister,
                                                             GEORGE ALLEN.

                                * * * * *

_Upper Barnsbury Street_, _Islington_,
         8_th_ _April_, 1861.




A SERMON.


                             NUMBERS i. 1, 2, 19.

    “And the LORD spake unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, in the
    tabernacle of the congregation, on the first day of the second month,
    in the second year after they were come out of the land of Egypt,
    saying, take ye the sum of all the congregation of the children of
    Israel . . .  As the LORD commanded Moses, so he numbered them in the
    wilderness of Sinai.”

THE reading the words of the text, dear brethren, will make it obvious,
that I desire this evening, to direct your attention to thoughts
connected with the great national act now taking place, the numbering the
people, _the census_.  Whilst the preacher of the Gospel should be
exceedingly careful, not to allow the things of time and sense to form
the burden of his ministry, yet there is much wisdom and profit, in
making use of those temporal matters which are engaging men’s thoughts,
as vehicles for reminding them of spiritual and eternal verities.  By
such a course a fitting direction is given to the minds of _believers_;
their contact with worldly duties is made a means of promoting their
spiritual life.  By such a course also the attention of the _still
unconverted_ is arrested, and those startling truths which tend to the
awakening of the soul, find sometimes, by God’s blessing, a lodgment in
the memory, because of their association with topics of worldly interest.
I pray that my endeavour this evening to improve the occasion of this
important national act—the taking of the census—by suggesting a few
thoughts in connection with it, may be blessed of the Holy Spirit to the
honour of our God, and the good of our souls.

I would classify my remarks, because I wish them to form the material of
much afterthought on your parts, under these divisions:—

1st.  The propriety and uses of a national census, and our duty with
regard to it.
2nd.  The thoughts which arise from the questions of the census paper.
3rd.  An omission in the census paper suggesting an important line of
thought.
4th.  The final census.

                                * * * * *

(I.)  The propriety and uses of a national census, and our duty with
regard to it.

Enumerations of the people, more or less complete, have found place in
almost all nations.  They seem an obvious necessity in all collections of
men pretending to a national existence.  Without them all legislation for
the internal welfare of a country and for its external defence must be
mere hap-hazard work.  Those to whom is committed the heavy burden of
ruling a great people such as this, have I think, a positive right to all
that information from the governed which may help them in the discharge
of their onerous and responsible duties.  It is not patriotic, to use no
loftier term, to look upon our government with the jaundiced eye of
suspicion, more especially when it exercises no undue inquisitiveness,
and pledges itself, as the government of our day does by the terms of the
census forms, that “The facts will be published in general abstracts
only, and strict care will be taken that the returns are not used for the
gratification of curiosity.”

Of course, dear friends, I am not qualified to speak fully of the uses of
a national census—a statesman only could do this, yet it is self-evident
that everything which tends to the amelioration of public evils and the
furtherance of the public good, must be subserved by the statistics so
gained.  Not only distinctive legislation, but also all our schemes for
the extension of education and the promotion of the work of Christ’s
Church can only find arguments, exactitude, and adaptation from the
knowledge to be gained by a national census.  I could enter into some
details, were it necessary or desirable in this place, to illustrate and
prove these points: but I think you will all be prepared to admit at once
that it is self-evident, that the plans of our rulers, and the efforts of
the philanthropical among us to do good in their day and generation, must
be very greatly facilitated by the information the census papers, if
faithfully filled up, will afford.

It seems strange that a measure so obviously proper and useful should
have had so many difficulties to contend with, and that these
difficulties should not have wholly disappeared before the boasted
enlightenment of the nineteenth century.  Prejudice must have been
intensely strong in days gone by; for it would seem to have to bear,
deservedly, the chief blame for past neglect in seeking the important
information which can alone be obtained through this channel.  It was not
till 1801, I believe, that the first actual enumeration of the people of
England and Scotland took place, although an imperfect attempt to
ascertain the number of the population had been made in the previous
century.  Since 1801 the census taking has become more general in the
United Kingdom.  England and Scotland were again enumerated in 1811, and
since then at the decennial periods of 1821, ’31 ’41 ’51; Ireland has
also been included in these latter census takings, and we may hope that
as the people become more accustomed to the matter, and more thoughtful
as to its uses, all remnants of the antiquated prejudice which hindered
it so long, will die out.  I would help towards this desirable end by
noticing for a passing moment the most prevalent _objection_ urged
against the census.

It is not in a few quarters that you hear, and probably in still more
quarters the notion is held, that the census is unscriptural, and
therefore will bring down upon the nation a curse and not a blessing.
Whence does this notion arise?  From a mistaken interpretation of
Scripture.  Do you not remember, says the objector, in a tone which
implies that he thinks he is about to demolish your case at once, Do you
not remember that David sinned in numbering the people, and that in
consequence a pestilence slew thousands of his subjects?  Yes, I remember
well the Scripture fact.  David sinned in numbering the people, but that
does not therefore prove that numbering the people is an act in itself
wrong.  David sinned because he did a right thing from a wrong motive.
Shall we say that almsgiving is sinful because some give from ostentation
and pride?  Surely not.  David numbered his people to gratify his pride,
to see his way to the carrying out designs of ambitious conquest,
concerning which, because he knew he was doing wrong, he took not counsel
of God.  And if we now number the people in this vain-glorious,
God-neglecting, proud, self-reliant spirit, then we too sin.  But surely
to number them with the view, under God, of furthering the internal
welfare of the kingdom and securing the defence of the precious
privileges God has given us to guard, is not to act in David’s sinful
spirit.  Let us pray for ourselves and rulers, my friends, that God may
be recognised in this census taking, that thanks may be given to Him for
any increase and progress in our nation this census may discover, and
that as He has cared for us in the past, we may make all our plans for
the future under the direction of His teaching and in dependence upon His
blessing.

But in truth, dear friends, this objection from Scripture is fully met
and controverted in Scripture itself.  God can never be the author of
evil, yet you will notice in our text, and you will find the same thing
in the 26th chapter of this book of Numbers, that God himself, at the
commencement and close of Israel’s journey in the wilderness, commanded
the numbering of the people above a certain age.  What God has once
commanded cannot in itself be wrong, else were God the author of evil.
The right thing becomes a wrong thing in us, when we do it in a wrong and
sinful spirit.

And now, dear friends, if you are satisfied that the taking the census is
not only not contrary to, but sanctioned by Scripture, and that its uses
are most important to the welfare of the state, bear with me if I urge
upon you your duty with regard to the paper you will deliver into the
hand of the appointed enumerator to-morrow.  _You are bound to fill up
that paper carefully and faithfully_.

I might urge a _selfish_ motive to induce you to do so; the future
welfare of the state,—politically, socially, religiously,—depends in a
measure upon the exactitude of the returns—the interest of each is bound
up in the interest of all—what furthers the public weal will enhance your
private benefit.

I urge again this duty upon the ground of _your obligations to your
neighbour_.  To the discharge of this care for his good, religion binds
you; and so also your position as a citizen of this country.  You have no
right to say you will do, and have a right to do, as you please in this
matter.  You receive great and unspeakable benefits from being a member
of an organised and governed society, where might is not right, but all
are under the protection of the law; and for these benefits you give
up,—are bound to give up, a portion of your individual liberty, else were
all government at an end, and submit yourself to such ordinances as those
who have public authority given to them in this realm consider to be for
the common good.

And further, I urge a yet higher motive.  You are bound to see to the
filling up of this census paper carefully and faithfully, without any
wilful deceit, _as a duty to God_.  “The powers that be are ordained of
God; he therefore that resisteth the power resisteth the ordinance of
God.”  That is a false, dishonest, ungodly axiom which finds place in the
world, that men may act, nay are rather to be applauded for acting
towards government, in a manner in which they would be ashamed to act
towards their fellow men.  To rob and deceive government is no less
robbery and deception, in the sight of God, than robbery and deception
practised towards private persons.  Public conscience, methinks, needs
this lesson in many a particular—in none more than in the matter of
withholding legal dues, and thus defrauding not only the public purse,
but also our fellow countrymen, our friends and neighbours.

This duty then is before us.  _The census paper should be filled up
carefully and faithfully_, because it is a duty to self, a duty to our
neighbours, a duty to our God, so to discharge a work which has Scripture
warrant, and on which the material, political, social, religious welfare
of our country so much depends.  I do not think, dear friends, that I am
acting contrary to my ministerial office in thus speaking, for I remember
I am the teacher of the religion which says, “Submit yourself to every
ordinance of man for the Lord’s sake, whether it be to the king as
supreme, or unto governors as unto them that are sent by Him for the
punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well;” the
religion which says “Honour all men.  Love the brotherhood.  Fear God.
Honour the king.”

                                * * * * *

(II.)  And now, dear friends, let me invite you to ponder over a few
thoughts which arise from the _questions_ of the census.

The census paper lies before us, and as we glance at its headings, we
cannot help feeling that it makes a certain _stand-point_ not only in the
national, but also in our personal history.  It bids us cast our eyes
back upon the past.  It cries to us, in no hesitating tones, as to the
present, “Man, know thyself.”  It compels us to look forward into the
all-undefined future, and wonder what shall be.

As the questions bid you write concerning yourself and others, surely
they bid you ponder over personal and relative duties.  Have they been
fulfilled in the past?  Are they being fulfilled at the present?  How
will they be fulfilled in the future?

You write in _your own name_,—your _Christian_ name.  Is it a cheat, or a
true outspeaking of your character?

_You write your age_.  How long have I lived?—ten, twenty, thirty, forty,
fifty, sixty, seventy years.  The past, the past! the things of which God
requires, how spent?  How long have I to live?  When the next census
comes, will my name be enrolled in it?  There must come a time when it
will cease to be entered in human records.  How soon?  Some died the very
day of the last census; some the day, the week, the year after.  It may
be thus with me this time.  Am I ready to die?  How long have I to live?

You write _the name of your wife_.  She sees you write it.  Are not both
reminded of solemn vows plighted in the presence of, and in dependence
upon the strength and blessing of God?  Have those vows been fulfilled or
broken?  Are they being now fulfilled?  Are ye helpers or hinderers of
one another’s salvation?

You write _the names of your children_, ‘the heritage and gift which has
come to you from the Lord.’  A fearfully responsible stewardship!  By
lip, and life, how have you trained them?  How are you training them?
How will you train them?  Is it in the nurture and admonition of the
Lord?  Is it for time or eternity,—for mammon or for God,—for hell or for
heaven?  No man liveth to himself.  You must influence their present and
eternal state.  How?

And, _young people_, I have a word for you.  Your father and mother call
you, and you stand by their side as they enter your names and ages in the
census paper, and so record you as their sons and daughters.  Is it not
well for you at such a time to pause, and think, and ask, Have I loved
and obeyed the parents God in mercy has given me, as I ought to have
done?  Have I honored my father and my mother according to the first
commandment with promise?  Have I copied His example, of whom, though He
was Lord of All, it is written concerning His conduct as the Son of Man
towards His parents, “He was subject unto them”?

The next heaviest curse to the curse of those despising the Saviour, is
the curse awaiting those who set light by father or mother.  See to it,
my young friends, that that curse light not on you.

You write in _the names of your dependents_.  Think, do you obey the
Scripture injunction, “Masters, give unto your servants that which is
just and equal, knowing that ye also have a Master in heaven”?  Think,
will any of them be able to present against you the condemning
accusation, “No man cared for my soul”?

Your names are being written in, _ye servants_.  Should not the question
arise in your minds, Am I a servant such as God would approve, ‘obeying
in all things my masters according to the flesh; not with eye service, as
men pleasers, but in singleness of heart, fearing God: whatsoever I do,
doing it heartily as to the Lord, and not unto men; knowing that of the
Lord I shall receive the reward of the inheritance; for I serve the Lord
Christ’?

You write _your occupation_.  Is it a calling you are ashamed to write?
We will suppose it is a lawful one.  Arises not the question, How
fulfilled?  With industry,—with honesty?  Am I free from the deceits and
trickeries so common in profession and trade, labouring to have a
conscience void of offence towards God and towards man?  Do I remember,
God would have me “diligent in business, fervent in spirit, serving the
Lord”?

Have I _ceased to have anything to do with the busy avocations of men_?
Is it that sickness has removed me from the active labours of life, or
that prosperous circumstances enable me to live at ease, apart from the
vexations and cares of business?  How is the leisure,—how are the means
spent?  Both are talents for which account must be given.  What account
shall I be able to render, when the Lord comes to reckon with His
servants?

This census paper,—_ten years_ have passed since the last came.  Ten
years!  How quickly flown: and yet a seventh portion of that span of
life,—the allotted term, to the end of which so few, few reach.  Ten
years! how many _sins_ have the moments which composed them witnessed!
Multitudes forgotten by me; not one unregistered in heaven.  Will they
appear against me?  Have they been cancelled?  Have I sought pardon,
where alone pardon can be found for them, in the cleansing fountain of
the Saviour’s blood?

Ten years!  How many _troubles_ have they witnessed!  Troubles,—ah, but
how many _mercies too_!  Think of THESE.  Troubles and mercies,—which
were most in number in the ten years passed?  You can count your
troubles, can you count your _blessings_?  Are you willing, in the next
ten years, to make this exchange: to let the troubles of the past ten
years be the measure of your mercies in the next ten years; and to let
the mercies of the past ten years be the measure of your troubles in the
coming ten?

“Bless the Lord, O my soul; and all that is within me, bless His Holy
Name.  Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all His benefits.” (Psa.
ciii.)

Yes, the past of national mercies and personal mercies, calls for
hallelujahs of adoring thanksgiving.  And that _past_ we ought gladly to
hail, as the _pledge_ of continued blessing in the _future_.  Let us
enter on that future,—the way we have not passed by heretofore,—singing,
“Ebenezer, hitherto the Lord hath helped us.”  “The Lord will provide.”

But this thought of God’s mercies leads me to notice a connected topic,
viz. the _propriety and expediency of making special offerings_ to God on
this solemn epoch in our history.  It was suggested to me by a respected
member of the congregation, that _we_ should have special collections
to-day; and the suggestion was urged by the most forcible of all
arguments, an appeal to Scripture.  Exodus xxx. 11–16 was referred to.
It is written there,—

    “And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, When thou takest the sum of
    the children of Israel after their number, then shall they give every
    man a ransom for his soul unto the Lord, when thou numberest them;
    that there be no plague among them, when thou numberest them.  This
    they shall give, every one that passeth among them that are numbered,
    half a shekel after the shekel of the sanctuary: (a shekel is twenty
    gerahs:) an half shekel shall be the offering of the Lord.  Every one
    that passeth among them that are numbered, from twenty years old and
    above, shall give an offering unto the Lord.  The rich shall not give
    more, and the poor shall not give less than half a shekel, when they
    give an offering unto the Lord, to make an atonement for your souls.
    And thou shalt take the atonement money of the children of Israel,
    and shalt appoint it for the service of the tabernacle of the
    congregation; that it may be a memorial unto the children of Israel
    before the Lord, to make an atonement for your souls.”

In connexion with these verses, I have read the following remarks in a
letter in the public press: “There has never, to my knowledge, been in
England,” says the writer in the religious periodical, “such a national
offering as is here indicated; but there has been on three occasions a
remarkable and progressive coincidence of calamity: thus after 1831,
cholera; after 1841, blight, influenza, cholera; and after 1851, cholera,
murrain, war.”

I deeply regret, my friends, that such words as these have ever appeared
in print; none could well be more mischievous, because none could well be
more likely to encourage the mistaken notion I met, and I trust
controverted, at the beginning of my sermon.  The writer seems to imply,
that these calamities followed because an offering was not made.  It is
God’s, not man’s province to trace such connections.  I believe he has
misconceived the teaching of Exod. xxx. 11–16, and would make a temporary
injunction of permanent force.  I state what I believe to be the true
meaning of the passage, in the words of a most able biblical scholar:
“This tax is not in Scripture mentioned in connection with any other
census” (save the one recorded in the first chapter of Numbers), “and we
are of opinion that it was only a _temporary_ measure to raise funds for
the making of the tabernacle.”

The suggestion therefore kindly made to me, I have not adopted, because I
did not think the Scripture proof adduced was sufficient to make it
imperative, and I was not willing to press upon your liberality by having
a formal collection.  Still I do feel the _spirit_ of Scripture would
teach, that this is a very fitting season for making thank-offerings to
God, for His love in the past, and for the blessing of continued life.
You who so feel with me can act as your consciences dictate.  Would you
devote your offerings to the service of this tabernacle of God, the boxes
at the doors can receive them.  Would you rather aid some special
religious work, missionary or otherwise, I shall be happy to become the
medium of conveying your gifts to the proper persons.

This census paper.  Ten years have passed since the last census.  How
many _changes in the family_ have taken place since then?  Some joyful,
some sorrowful.  Some _joyful_ surely: names that were missing then, are
found now; divided families have become united; little ones, blessed
sunbeams from heaven, have been sent to cheer and gladden the home; and
poor prodigals have come back again to the early loved threshold, and
found peace in a loving father’s embrace, happy, if not only in an
earthly father’s, but in a Heavenly One’s too.

But _sorrowful_ changes also, have those ten years seen; and as surely
will the next ten.  Another name than that entered at the last census, is
now recorded under the division, “Write the name of the head of the
family.”  “The head of the family!”  He sleeps in the silent tomb.  And
where is now the wife’s, the mother’s, the child’s, the brother’s, or the
sister’s name?  ’Twas written in the census paper in 1851; it must not be
written in the census paper of 1861.  Their names are written on the
churchyard stone, the clods of the valley are sweet to them.  Ah, did we
love them as we ought to have done?  Did we love them as we wish now we
had done?  Happy, happy, those families, who, united not only in the
bonds of nature but of grace, can look forward to the time when, through
faith in a living Saviour, they shall meet in that land where partings
are unknown; that land where there shall be no more death.

_Sorrowful changes_ have the past ten years seen.  Some filled up the
last census paper in a mansion who will fill up this one in a garret.
Riches have taken to themselves wings, and flown away.  Ye who are
prosperous now, remember the fleeting character of earthly possessions.
Some entered then the names of children who have since dashed their cup
of hope to the ground, and who will this time find entry, not in a
father’s home, but in a felon’s prison house.  Well, in heaven you will
bless the stroke which taught you this is not your rest, and bid you seek
that abiding rest which remaineth for the people of God.  Aye, and even
here, amid gloom and sadness, light shall break in upon your darkness, if
ye rest, believers, upon the promise, “ALL things work together for good
to them that love God.”

This census paper!  Ten years _have passed_.  Ten years of the time given
to work out my salvation with fear and trembling.  Have I gone forward,
or have I gone backward in religion?  Am I nearer to, or further from
God?  Answer,—am I more like, or more unlike my Saviour?

                                * * * * *

(III.)  These questions are not asked of me in the census paper.  No, my
friends; and the _omission_ of all reference to _religion_ in that paper,
is just the very point which I think may suggest a most important line of
thought.  Mind, my friends, I find no fault with the census paper for
this omission.  One perhaps could wish, that statistics as to the numbers
of the various religious bodies, and the number of worshippers, could
have been obtained; but I doubt not, there were great difficulties in the
way; and temptations to unfair returns, and indulgence of angry passions,
may thus perhaps have been avoided.  And, after all, though I will not
yield to any man in regret at, and condemnation of, the sad schism and
division which exist in Christ’s Church, yet I cannot help feeling, that
the absence of distinctive classification of religious bodies in the
census, is just what will find place at LAST.  Then the question will not
be, were you Episcopalian or Nonconformist? but, Did you love the Lord
Jesus Christ in sincerity and truth?  And, with the Apostle, I say, may
grace be with all those who do so.

But, my friends, although the census paper asks you not this year about
your _professed_ religion, remember God is always taking His census, as
to the state of your REAL religion.  In the never-failing memory of God,
your name, age, dwelling, and true description, are all noted down.  He
is spying out all our ways.  We cannot keep any secret from Him.  “All
things are naked and opened unto the eyes of Him with whom we have to
do.”  In His census taking, He makes two grand divisions,—foes,
friends;—not in His Church, in His Church;—unbelievers, believers;—lost,
saved.  Now, my friends, if you could see under which division God has
written your names, think you, would it be among the lost or saved?  Nay,
you may know that _now_, for a certainty.  Listen to the Word of God:
“_Except ye repent_, _ye shall all likewise perish_.”  Have you repented?
Do you repent?  “_He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life_,
_and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life_, _but the wrath of
God abideth on him_.”  Now have you believed in, do you believe in Jesus
for salvation, pardon, acceptance, peace, glory?  “_Without holiness no
man shall see the Lord_.”  Are you fighting against sin, are you striving
to be holy?

Oh my friends, it is, methinks, a proud thing to have one’s name
enrolled, by means of this census, as a citizen of free happy England;
but ’tis a far prouder thing to have it enrolled as a citizen of Heaven,
of the kingdom which shall know no decay.

Oh see to it that you make sure work of your state before God.  It is a
blessed thing to think, that though God may have had your name for many,
many long years in His census book among the list of the lost,—His foes;
He is yet willing, nay is longing to transfer it, upon your repentance,
faith, obedience, to the list of the saved,—His friends.  See to it, I
say, that the name you bear as your description, _a Christian_, be a true
name, witnessed in your occupations of penitence for sin, trust in Jesus,
holy living to God; for remember, remember, the

IV.  FINAL CENSUS will ere long be taken, which shall consign each one of
us to irretrievable woe, or usher us to inconceivable blessings.  Yes,
presently, angels will play the part of enumerators.  They will not
indeed seek information of you, for God knows them that are His, and them
that are not.  Then before the great white throne you will stand, and all
your life will be told.  There an assembled world must meet,—not one
missing; and then the angels will play their part in the great, the final
census.  Then will they discern between the righteous and the wicked;
then will they separate between the just and the unjust, the believers in
Jesus, and those who have not believed in Him.  Then will it be declared
whether my name, and thine, my friend, be written or not written in the
Lamb’s book of life, and on that issue will depend whether we be
registered in the book of Eternity as citizens of hell, or as citizens of
heaven.

Brethren, now is the time to decide which it will be.  The choice, under
God, is in our hands to-day, to-morrow may be too late.

    “There’s no repentance in the grave,
    Nor hope of pardon there.”

And _there_, in the grave, you may be, I say not before another census
taking comes, but before another day dawns.  The names of some of those
who are at this moment written in the census-paper as among the living,
will have to be withdrawn, erased, before that paper be handed to the
enumerator to-morrow morning, and entered in another register, the
register of the dead.  It may be so in the case of some here to-night.
With which one shall it be so?  With which _one_?  “Lord, is it I?”

                                * * * * *

                                * * * * *

                         SEELEY, ISLINGTON GREEN.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NUMBERING OF THE PEOPLE***


******* This file should be named 64876-0.txt or 64876-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/6/4/8/7/64876


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

